---
layout: post
title: "Language Comparison: Provided Types"
---

I recently completed working through the book [Crafting Interpreters](https://craftinginterpreters.com/) by Bob Nystrom (if you are not familiar with the book, and are even remotely interested in programming languages or compilers, I can't recommend it highly enough). By completing the book I have implemented two distinct interpreters for a toy programming language called "Lox", and naturally now I am convinced I am a legit _language hacker_ and desperately need to prove myself by implementing my own programming language.

### Motivation: Why Do Type Systems Matter?

A programming language's type system (or lack thereof) fundamentally influences the way in which we express programs in that language.

_Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs_ by Niklaus Wirth (not conincidentally, this is also the name of one of my [favorite podcasts](https://adspthepodcast.com/)).

### Crystal

### Haskell

### Python

Python famously (or infamously, depending on your perspective) does not enforce any static type constraints. Instead, the language relies on dynamic typing.

The "protocol view" of Python. I was first introduced to this concept in the talk [So You Want to Be a Python Expert](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cKPlPJyQrt4&t=6216s) by James Powell from PyData Seattle 2017.

All values in Python support truth-testing. The language also provides the literals `True` and `False` which are always truthy and always falsey, respectively.

Strings are represented in Python by the `str` type.

Python supports three numeric types: `int`, `float`, and `complex`. 

Python provides several built-in sequence types: `list`, `tuple`, and `range`.

Python provides built-in support for several binary types including `bytes`, `bytearray`, and `memoryview`.

### Swift

While Swift might not technically fall into the "scripting language" category, I find that programming in Swift often _feels_ like programming in a scripting language. This is largely a product of the language's high-level syntax, powerful type-inference, and generally the productivity that it enables. How ever one categorizes the language, I find the Swift type system a pleasant one with which to work, rendering it worthy of inclusion in this post.

Swift represents boolean values with the `Bool` type. Instances of `Bool` may be initialized with the literals `true` or `false` or as the result of a boolean expression. Unlike other languages (e.g. Python), Swift does not support implicit conversions to `Bool` in conditional contexts. Modern C/C++ compilers already warn on such implicit conversions, but this is still a nice feature to call out.

```Swift
// Initialize a boolean value
var truthy = true
// Toggle the value (really the only interesting operation on booleans)
truthy.toggle()
```

Swift provides three numeric types: `Int`, `Float`, and `Double`. The `Int` type represents signed integral values; on 32-bit platforms it is backed by a 32-bit representation while on 64-bit platforms it is backed by a 64-bit representation. Unsurprisingly, the `Float` type represents a 32-bit floating point value and the `Double` type represents a 64-bit floating point value.

```Swift
// Infer an Int type
var ten = 10
print("\(ten.isMultiple(of: 5))") // true

// Explicitly specify a Double type
var twentyFive : Double = 25
// Invoke a method
var five = twentyFive.squareRoot()
```

Swift strings are represented by the `String` type which utilizes Unicode encoding. Like other languages, a `String` instance is actually a sequence of `Character`s which compose the string. Swift offers a comprehensive set of methods on the `String` type that allow one to interact with `String` instances at both high and low (underlying encoding) levels.

```Swift
let hello = "Hello"
let world = "World"

let helloWorld = hello + " " + world
print(helloWorld.count) // 11
```

Finally, Swift provides three collection types in the standard library: `Array`, `Set`, and `Dictionary`. The `Array` type is a simple, dynamic sequence container analogous to Python's `List` or C++'s `std::vector`. However, unlike Python's `List`, each item in an `Array` must have the same type (expected for a statically-typed language like Swift). 

```Swift
// Create a new, empty array
var algoPeople = ["Cormen", "Leiserson", "Rivest"]
// Append to the end of the array
algoPeople += "Stein"
// Iterate over the array
for person in algoPeople {
    print("\(person) is a co-author of Introduction to Algorithms")
}
```

As one might expect, the `Set` type is used for unordered collections of unique items, each of which must be of the same type. 

```Swift
// Create a new set with a set literal
var instructions: Set = ["push", "pop", "ret"]
// Insert a new item into the set
instructions.insert("cmp")

// Query the set for membership
if instructions.contains("mov") {
    print("Turing Complete!")
} else {
    print("Not Sufficiently Expressive!")
}
```

Swift's dictionaries are used to implement and unordered mapping from a common _key_ type to a common _value_ type.

```Swift
// Create an empty dictionary mapping String -> Int
var nameToAge : [String : Int] = [:]
// Create a dictionary from a dictionary literal
var nameToAge = ["Alan Turing": 13, "Ada Lovelace": 37]
// Query a key
let turingsAge = nameToAge["Alan Turing"]
// Update a value
nameToAge["Alan Turing"] = 42
```

One interesting aspect of the Swift type system is the fact that none of the types listed above are built-in to the language implementation; instead, all of these types are included in the Swift standard library. The original designer of the language, Chris Lattner, stated [in an interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yCd3CzGSte8) that this design is intended to allow users of the language to implement their own types that look and feel like primitives. This seems to go hand-in-hand with Swift's dedication to value semantics.
